Another heuristic which Edward Tufte
introduces us to is called chartjunk.
Now Tufte is much more damning of
chartjunk than he is of other forms
of non-data ink.
Indeed, he suggests that artistic
decorations on statistical graphs are like
weeds in our data graphics.
He suggested there's really
three kinds of chartjunk.
The first is unintended optical art.
For instance, excessive shading or
patterning of chart features,
such as shown in this economics graphic
which Tufte shares in his book,
The Visual Display of
Quantitative Information.
Here, the patterns make the human
eye jump and cause visual fatigue.
These phenomenon
are called moiré patterns.
And this is the same reason you don't
usually see people wearing stripe shirts
when filming video content like this MOOC,
since the low resolution of the video
accentuates the moiré issue.
Tufte suggests that instead
of patterning this content,
one is better off labeling
the chart graphics directly.
We saw that being used in the data ink
ratio example by Darkhorse Analytics.
The second form of chartjunk is the grid.
Tufte suggested the grid is both
unnecessary as data ink, but
also causes competition with
the actual data being shared.
Thinning, removing, or desaturating grid
lines makes it easier to see the data,
instead of being overwhelmed by
the number of lines on the page.
Direct labeling of data is another great
way to reduce this form of chartjunk.
But it's the third form of chartjunk
that I want to focus on here.
It's the one which typically comes to
mind when talking about chartjunk.
Tufte calls this the duck.
Broadly, he's referring to
non-data creative graphics,
whether they be line art or photographs
and they're inclusion in the chart.
Newspapers and news magazines are a place
where this kind of imagery is often used.
One well-known graphic artist,
Nigel Holmes, has used the duck to
display data in a way which is memorable
yet aesthetically interesting.
One of the most memorable images
he's created, to me, is entitled,
Diamonds Were a Girl's Best Friend.
And this showed up in
a Times Magazine in 1982.
This graphic shows the trend of the price
of diamonds from 1978 to 1982, and
while the dollar amounts
are easily forgotten, it's easy
to remember that the trend have a spike
because of the shape of the woman's leg.
So is the doc really a useful heuristic,
or
is it something about
docs which are memorable?
I was part of a team led by Scott Bateman
who wanted to understand
this issue in more detail.
So we set up some user testing.
I've linked the full academic
paper in this week's readings.
In short, we provided participants
a variety of homes as image,
including the one which you were shown,
which could be considered chartjunk.
We also included a variety of plain
graphs with high data-ink ratios,
with no decorative embellishments.
We brought 24 subjects
into the laboratory and
assigned them to either view the Holmes or
high data-ink ratio conditions.
We asked the subjects to describe and
summarize the charts with
a series of guided questions.
This was followed with a recall test,
both conducted immediately, as well as
a second test two to three weeks later.
Finally, we used eye tracking to determine
where subjects were paying attention
when they looked at these charts.
Our findings were interesting.
While there was no recall
difference when tested immediately,
recall after two to three weeks
was significantly better for
the Holmes Charts,
which showed the duck chartjunk.
Further subjects indicated subjectively
that the Holmes Charts were more
enjoyable, more attractive,
easier to remember, and
easier to remember details of.
And they felt it was faster to describe
and remember the Holmes Charts.
The non-embellished designs didn't perform
better than any of the Holmes designs did.
Does this mean that you should use
embellishments in your charts?
Well, maybe.
I don't know of anyone who has
replicated our findings on a larger and
more diverse population, and there are
certainly other kinds of chartjunk, like
the unintended optical art in the grid
which seem like really good heuristics.
But I think there's more to be told in the
story and more nuance to be worked out.
At this point, you should have, at least,
some thoughts from designers as well as
from a user study on
specific kinds of charts.
And as you go about creating your
data science graphics, it's worth
not only reflecting on the principles you
use and the results you are sharing, but
also the process by which you
came up to create the graphics.
Setting up a user's study is much simpler
today with crowd sourcing services,
such as CrowdFlower and
Amazon Mechanical Turk.
It's now very reasonable for the average
data scientist to test out whether
more embellished visuals
might be more effective.
Whether it's in terms of time,
memorability, accuracy
than those with data-ink.
In the next lecture, we're going to go on
to touch on two more items from Tufte,
the Lie Factor and sparklines.